From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. This is The Daily.
[Music]
The White House border czar, Tom Homan,
was recorded on an FBI surveillance tape
in September 2024 accepting $50,000 in
cash. Did he keep that money or give it
back? For the past few weeks, Trump
officials have been asked repeatedly
about an undercover FBI investigation of
border czar, Tom Homan. What became of
the $50,000 in cash that the FBI
delivered to Mr. Homan? And
consistently, they've sidestepped
>> Did he accept that $50,000 or not?
George, I don't know what you're talking
about. Did he accept $50,000 for what?
>> or refused to answer key questions. Did
the FBI get it back? Senator Whitehouse,
you're welcome to talk to the FBI. about
whether one of Trump's top immigration
officials brazenly broke the law and
what's being done about it. The White
House and the president stand by Tom
Homan 100%
because he did absolutely nothing wrong
and he is a Today, my colleague Devlin
Barrett on the story behind those
questions and why the Tom Homan scandal
hasn't faded away.
[Music]
It's Wednesday, October 15th.
Devlin, I've been watching this story of
these allegations surrounding Tom Homan
unfold over the past several weeks and
as I've watched, I keep thinking about
this interview I did with Homan on the
show in June.
One thing that really stuck with me from
that interview was just how
uncompromising Homan was in the way he
presented his view of the law and what
should happen to people who break it.
That they should be punished.
And I want to just play you a little bit
of tape about how he represented himself
and that mission.
We're a nation of laws, right? We got to
enforce the laws. Entering this country
illegally is a crime.
We don't pick and choose what we
enforce. We're here to enforce the law.
And then recently, we got some new
information about Homan.
Tell us when you first learned about
this story.
So, I cover the Justice Department and
the FBI and months ago, I had started
hearing rumblings
that there had been some kind of bribery
investigation related to Tom Homan.
But I couldn't quite figure out what it
was about or where it was.
And for a while, I it just was a puzzle
I couldn't solve. You had a lot of other
stories you were covering. Yeah, it's
pretty busy at the DOJ and the FBI most
days.
Then sometime in September, I
got a little more information where
someone knew some of the answers to
these questions
and
said, you know, "Oh, you mean the case
with the bag of cash?" Woah, bag of
cash. It's a that's a pretty big tip.
Well, right. That's not, you know, what
you'd think of as like, let's call it
regular business practice, right? It's
almost the stereotypical way
that people think of corruption cases.
Yeah. So, from that point, I started
putting more pieces together and
figuring more things out. I wasn't the
only reporter chasing
this. MSNBC also figured it out. And so,
what I eventually came to understand was
that there had been, beginning really in
2023,
but stretching
all the way into this year, a really
fascinating investigation
that came to include Tom Homan.
As it's been described to me by sources,
if you go to back to the spring of 2023,
the FBI in Texas was conducting an
undercover investigation related to a
particular businessman
and the investigation, my sources were
adamant, was not looking at Tom Homan at
all. But in the course of that
investigation,
that businessman told the undercover
agents
that if those agents were posing as
businessmen looking for government
contracts, if they were willing to pay
Tom Homan a million dollars, he could
steer government contracts to them.
So, these agents weren't initially
fishing for anything related to Tom
Homan. They weren't looking at him at
that time.
My sources were adamant that no one had
asked about Tom Homan. That was brought
up unprompted and Tom Homan just sort of
wanders into the picture, wanders into
the frame of what the FBI agents are
already doing.
Wow.
Just to put us in time here, we're in
2023. We know Tom Homan as the former
ICE director in the first Trump
administration, this long-time border
official. He actually served in the
Obama administration, but he's not in
government at this point, right? Right.
He's just a private citizen and he runs
a consulting business for companies that
are seeking contracts. So, it's not
completely out of the blue that he would
have some interest in government
contracts. But again, he's not in
government at that time and he's he's
known mostly as a former Trump official
who is what they sometimes call a
campaign surrogate. He often would
appear, you know, speaking publicly in
support of another Trump administration.
And there's a lot of general expectation
that if Trump wins re-election, Homan
will
rejoin the government. And in November
of 2023, he out and out says it. He
says, you know, "I promised President
Trump
that if he goes back, I go back."
And then he added to that,
"And I'm going to run the biggest
deportation operation this country's
ever seen." Right. He's he's widely seen
as a likely member of a future Trump
administration. He's saying he's going
to be there and there's this sense that
a lot of money is going to be thrown at
the area that he's going to be involved
in in in border enforcement. Well,
right. That that whole time period, the
Trump
campaign is talking about deporting
millions of people. It is a very
expensive prospect. So, there's a
natural expectation that there will be
significant government contracts related
to both border security work
and deportation work.
Okay. So, back to the investigation.
What happens next?
So, once that businessman just sort of
proposes this notion that uh the
undercover agents could pay Tom Homan to
get government contracts,
a series of conversations follow.
This investigation goes on for a long
time, but eventually a meeting is set up
for September 20th, 2024. And at that
meeting,
my sources tell me the undercover agents
bring $50,000 in cash.
And that cash is put in a takeout food
bag, a bag from the chain Cava.
[Music]
So, what has been described to me is at
that meeting,
Homan both accepts the cash
and seems to convey that he's willing to
help them get contracts in the future.
Do we know exactly what he says? Devlin,
do we have any specific information
about that? We don't know exactly what
he says and that's obviously a big
question in this whole process, but we
do know that the FBI agents made an
audio recording of the meeting.
So, somewhere in government files, there
exists, I am told, an audio recording of
this discussion.
And what's been described to me is that
Homan accepts the cash and leaves.
And that's a great start to an
investigation. You've got a lot to work
with there, right? Because the person
you are investigating has taken the
money
and appears to have agreed to do things
in exchange for the money.
But that's not really the end of the
investigation. Why not?
For a couple of reasons. One, because
there was no very specific act that he
agreed to do in exchange for that money.
And two, it's important to remember, at
the time he takes the money, Tom Homan
is still not a government official.
He certainly can't make the Biden
administration, which was running the
government at that time, award
contracts. So, in the moment the cash is
handed over,
Homan really can't deliver even if he
wants to. Right. I guess the assumption
here is that this is like a down payment
for future services that he could
potentially render, correct?
Right. The investigators thought of it
as this is the start of the
relationship. This is the start of the
process. Devlin, does that help explain
uh question I've had about all this,
which is $50,000 is a lot of money, but
it also doesn't feel like enough for
someone like Homan to do something this
risky that could really jeopardize his
career.
Right. It wasn't necessarily that you
give him this $50,000
and then he immediately starts doing
things for you.
One source described it as, you know,
they paid money to make a friend. In in
a regular corruption investigation,
there would naturally be follow-up
meetings, maybe follow-up payments.
That's certainly a possibility in such a
in such an investigation. Right. They're
playing the long game here. Exactly.
They have a very strong start to a case.
They have very good evidence and they
have a very good basis to proceed with
their investigation.
And then, Trump wins the election.
Right.
And within days of Trump winning the
election, the president-elect announces
that Tom Homan will become his border
czar.
And not many people know the ins and
outs of bizarre positions that
government and White House is sometimes
announced. Yeah, I've always wondered,
is that a real long-term position in the
US government, czar? It's not a
something you're nominated for. It's not
something that the Senate confirms you
for. It's it's very much sort of a point
person for an administration on a
particular subject.
But what matters in this instance is
that because there's no Senate
confirmation, there's not the same kind
of background check scrubbing that goes
on for a czar position as there is for a
cabinet official or a deputy cabinet
official.
And that's important in Homan's
situation because there is this
underlying
outstanding case.
Are you saying basically that this might
have been intentional? That the Trump
administration might have nominated
Homan to the czar position in order to
avoid a background check?
It's really unclear. But we do know,
however, that
during the transition, after Trump is
elected but before he is sworn into
office,
federal law enforcement officials notify
and and essentially warn the incoming
administration
that this investigation exists into Tom
Homan. And the Trump Justice Department
then does inherit this investigation.
Walk us through what they do with it.
The short answer is they don't do much
of anything with it.
[Music]
The senior officials of that
administration look at the case
and
they don't like it.
[Music]
They're very skeptical that if this is
anything worth pursuing and this this
case that the agents and investigators
thought was was a very solid case, a
very promising start, it just gets
closed.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
So, Devlin, once this story breaks about
the investigation and about the ending
of the investigation, what happens? How
does the Trump administration respond?
Do they explain their decision to drop
this case?
So, when we asked the Justice Department
to explain, you know, why was this case
closed, the FBI director Kash Patel and
the Deputy Attorney General Todd Blanche
said that, you know, it was reviewed by
agents and prosecutors
and they said those agents and
prosecutors found no credible evidence
of any criminal wrongdoing.
They basically called it uh baseless
investigation.
And that's why they say they closed it.
They don't mention the bag of cash
specifically?
They don't mention the bag of cash and
that becomes a real focal point of all
the questions that follow
about what the administration did here
and why they did it.
One of the first very public comments
about all this is the White House press
secretary Karoline Leavitt
>> Does Homan have to return the $50,000?
Well, Mr. Homan never took the $50,000
that you're referring to, so you should
get your facts straight, number one.
denying that he took the money at all.
Hours after that, Tom, I want to give
you a chance to address this article
that came out over the weekend. Tom
Homan goes on Fox News and he's given an
opportunity to just respond to the
reporting, respond to these allegations.
And his answer is very telling in one
way in that he never denies taking the
money. Look, I did nothing criminal. I
did nothing illegal. And the hit piece
after hit piece after hit piece. He
repeats very emphatically that he didn't
commit any crime. And I'm glad the FBI
and DOJ came out and said. And then, you
know, it said that nothing illegal
happened, nothing, you know, no criminal
activity.
Yeah, suddenly we're talking not about
whether this happened or not, but about
whether it was legal. And obviously
those two things are very different.
Right. And so, the administration ends
up getting very adamant about the point
that Homan makes in his interview on
this, which is just to say there was no
crime here. And that becomes a kind of
mantra throughout the administration as
the questions keep coming up.
>> know sitting here with the money?
>> is that Deputy Attorney General Todd
Blanche and FBI Director Patel said
there was no case. And Karoline
>> Last week, there's a hearing before the
Senate Judiciary Committee in which
Attorney General Pam Bondi is very
confrontational. Was she right?
>> for me, you would have been fired. She
is adamant that no crime was committed
and she basically goes on the attack and
just criticizes the lawmakers who are
even asking the question. Hmm. In the
same vein, just this past weekend, the
Vice President J.D. Vance is interviewed
by ABC's George Stephanopoulos and he's
asked again about Tom Homan and the bag
of cash.
>> question, are you saying that he not
accept the $50,000?
Vance's answer is very similar to
Bondi's. The question is, did he do
something illegal? And there's
absolutely no evidence that Tom Homan
has ever taken a bribe
>> question.
>> I'm asking you which is why he's working
in the administration. I I'm asking He
insists no crime was committed and again
goes on the attack for even asking the
question.
Of course, this administration dropped
the investigation before they could
actually prove whether or not a crime
was being committed. So, Devlin, what do
you make of their argument?
So, on a political level, their argument
is very simple. This was a partisan
witch hunt generated by the last
Democratic administration.
The legal argument is actually a little
more complicated and it touches on a lot
of things. First, I would just say
not everyone inside the Justice
Department has the exact same view
about this case. I have talked to people
who feel very strongly that it was a
very strong case, a chargeable case, a
pursuable case and it's
frustrating to those people that the
case was dropped. I have talked to other
people inside the department who have
made the argument, "Look, this was a
great beginning of a case. We had not
finished the case and it's not a
terrific case
without more evidence."
So, there aren't universal views about
this even inside the department.
But it also this case speaks to what's
really a long-running disagreement
about whether or not the Justice
Department is overusing and stretching
corruption laws
beyond what they were intended to do.
And
over a number of years, the Supreme
Court has basically whittled away at how
federal corruption laws can be used and
has repeatedly sent a signal to the
Justice Department that certainly the
conservatives on the court believe that
the Justice Department is in many cases
misusing or overusing corruption
statutes to go after politicians.
Meaning there's a disagreement within
the legal community about what actually
constitutes corruption or at least
what's the threshold for proving it in
court.
Well, exactly. And one of the ways that
this case gets argued about among
lawyers is there's something called
stream of benefits corruption, which
makes the argument that you don't need a
very explicit quid pro quo. You don't
need a very explicit you give me X
dollars and I will do Y for you.
Sopranos style. Right. That what you can
have is a sort of corrupt flow
relationship where
I do the following things for you, like
cash,
and you in exchange do the following
things for me,
like official favors,
but the court has to believe that it's
explicit. It can't just be a vague set
of actions.
That's the argument for how you could
charge a case like this.
So, there are obviously a lot of open
legal questions here and maybe what the
FBI had in its hands wasn't an open and
shut case yet. But Homan taking this
money, as a lawman, as the chief
spokesman of this administration's
immigration policy, it does raise all
sorts of questions. And the
administration not following up also
raises questions. I guess what I'm
wondering, Devlin, is
there's been so many similar scandals
swirling around the Trump administration
at this point, allegations of
corruption, from crypto to the free
airplane.
A lot of those have kind of faded away
in the firehose of news that we are all
experiencing on a day-to-day basis.
But this one has kind of outlived the
Trump news cycle.
Why? I mean, look, as someone who covers
the Justice Department and the FBI, I
will tell you that there are many
corruption cases that are hard to
follow, hard to explain, hard to just
unravel and unpack.
Crypto isn't an easy thing to explain.
>> Sure. You know what is easy to explain?
A Cavab bag full of cash. That's pretty
simple. Why did he take a bag of cash?
What did he do with the cash? Hmm. And
in addition to how simple a bag of cash
is, we know from the reporting that an
audio tape exists somewhere. Right. And
that tape could be released. People
could start demanding its release.
Right. So, if you think for a minute
about the Jeffrey Epstein case,
obviously the Tom Homann case is not the
Jeffrey Epstein case. Epstein is a
completely different type of case with a
completely different history.
But, the demand to release the Tom
Homann tape is in some ways very similar
to the demands to release the Epstein
files because it's a simple
straightforward question
and it it sort of when you are told no,
it begs the question, well, why is the
answer no? Can I just ask, do we know
what happened to the money? The 50,000?
We really don't. A lot of what you've
seen since the initial reporting is
people trying to figure out the answer
to that question, but the administration
really won't tell us and uh Homann so
far hasn't told us.
So, the case may be dead, but I think
what hasn't died is people's
desire to know the answer to that
question. So, I think
for the foreseeable future, wherever Tom
Homann goes, he's going to be asked that
question.
What did you do with the money?
Well, Devlin, thanks so much for coming
on the show. Thanks for having me.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you should know today.
On Tuesday, President Trump announced
that the US had killed six men aboard a
boat off the coast of Venezuela. The
fifth known strike on a boat in the
Caribbean Sea since September.
He said the men had been transporting
drugs, but provided no evidence to
support that claim. And while he posted
a video of the attack, the president
offered no details about the nationality
of the suspects and didn't identify them
as belonging to any particular criminal
group.
The US military has now killed 27 people
in these boat attacks, treating them as
if they were enemy soldiers in the
middle of a war zone rather than
criminal suspects.
And
>> It's a great honor to have the leader of
Argentina, place that I love, I've been
to,
and one of the most beautiful places in
the world, President, and I really want
to thank you very much.
>> Trump posted Argentinian President
Javier Milei at the White House on
Tuesday, just days after the US agreed
to move ahead with a $20 billion bailout
of Argentina.
We think he's going to win, he should
win,
and if he does win, we're going to be
very helpful. And if he doesn't win,
we're not going to waste that time
because
uh you you have somebody whose
philosophy has no chance of making
Argentina great again.
Trump explicitly tied US economic
support for the country to the political
fortunes of Milei, who's trying to stave
off a financial meltdown at home and
whose party is facing tough midterm
elections this month.
Trump acknowledged that the bailout was
intended to support the Argentinian
leader's fiscally conservative policies
and wouldn't make a big difference for
the US.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Caitlin
O'Keefe and Carlos Prieto. It was edited
by Lisa Balin and Michael Benoît
and contains original music by Marion
Lozano, Will Reed, and Dan Powell and
was engineered by Alyssa Moxley.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. See you tomorrow.
[Music]